README.md, before:

# ComfyUI Qwen VL Nodes

This repository provides ComfyUI nodes that wrap the latest vision-language and language-only checkpoints from the Qwen family. Both **Qwen3 VL** and **Qwen2.5 VL** models are supported for multimodal reasoning, alongside text-only Qwen2.5/Qwen3 models for prompt generation.

## What's New

- **Custom Model Support**: Load any Qwen2.5/Qwen3 compatible model from HuggingFace via `custom_models.json`
- **Multi-Image Input**: QwenVL node now supports up to 4 image inputs for multi-image reasoning
- **Bypass Mode**: Skip model inference and pass text directly through for workflow debugging
- **Increased Token Limit**: Max tokens increased to 8000 for longer outputs
- **System Prompt**: QwenVL node now exposes system prompt for custom instructions
- Added support for the Qwen3 VL family (`Qwen3-VL-4B-Thinking`, `Qwen3-VL-8B-Thinking`, etc.)
- Retained compatibility with existing Qwen2.5 VL models
- Text-only workflows support both Qwen2.5 and Qwen3 instruct checkpoints

## Sample Workflows

- Multimodal workflow example: [`workflow/Qwen2VL.json`](workflow/Qwen2VL.json)
- Text generation workflow example: [`workflow/qwen25.json`](workflow/qwen25.json)

![Qwen VL workflow](workflow/comfy_workflow.png)
![Qwen text workflow](workflow/comfy_workflow2.png)

## Installation

You can install through ComfyUI Manager (search for `Qwen-VL wrapper for ComfyUI`) or manually:

1. Clone the repository:

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/alexcong/ComfyUI_QwenVL.git
   ```

2. Change into the project directory:

   ```bash
   cd ComfyUI_QwenVL
   ```

3. Install dependencies (ensure you are inside your ComfyUI virtual environment if you use one):

   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

## Supported Nodes

### QwenVL Node (Vision-Language)

Multimodal generation with Qwen3 VL and Qwen2.5 VL checkpoints.

**Inputs:**
- `system` – System prompt for model instructions (default: "You are a helpful assistant.")
- `text` – User prompt/question
- `image1`, `image2`, `image3`, `image4` – Up to 4 optional image inputs (processed in order)
- `video_path` – Optional video input
- `model` – Select from built-in or custom models
- `quantization` – none/4-bit/8-bit for memory optimization
- `keep_model_loaded` – Cache model between runs
- `bypass` – Pass text directly to output without inference
- `temperature` – Sampling temperature (0-1)
- `max_new_tokens` – Maximum output tokens (up to 8000)
- `seed` – Manual seed for reproducibility (-1 for random)

### Qwen Node (Text-Only)

Text-only generation backed by Qwen2.5/Qwen3 instruct models.

**Inputs:**
- `system` – System prompt
- `prompt` – User prompt
- `model` – Select from built-in or custom models
- `quantization` – none/4-bit/8-bit
- `keep_model_loaded` – Cache model between runs
- `bypass` – Pass prompt directly to output without inference
- `temperature`, `max_new_tokens`, `seed` – Generation parameters

## Custom Models

You can add any Qwen2.5 or Qwen3 compatible model from HuggingFace by editing the `custom_models.json` file in this directory.

### Adding Custom Models

Edit `custom_models.json` with the following structure:

```json
{
  "hf_models": {
    "My-Custom-Model-Name": {
      "repo_id": "username/model-repo-name",
      "model_class": "Qwen3",
      "default": false,
      "quantized": false,
      "vram_requirement": {
        "4bit": 4,
        "8bit": 6,
        "full": 12
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Field Descriptions

| Field | Required | Description |
|-------|----------|-------------|
| `repo_id` | **Yes** | HuggingFace repository ID (e.g., `"coder3101/Qwen3-VL-2B-Instruct-heretic"`) |
| `model_class` | No | Force model architecture: `"Qwen3"` or `"Qwen2.5"`. Auto-detected from name if omitted. |
| `default` | No | Reserved for future use |
| `quantized` | No | Informational: whether the model is pre-quantized |
| `vram_requirement` | No | Informational: estimated VRAM usage in GB for each quantization level |

### Model Type Detection

- **VL (Vision-Language) models**: Names containing `-VL-` are added to the QwenVL node dropdown
- **Text-only models**: All other models are added to the Qwen node dropdown
- **Model class**: Auto-detected from name (`Qwen3` if name contains "Qwen3", otherwise `Qwen2.5`)

### Example: Adding a Fine-tuned Model

```json
{
  "hf_models": {
    "Qwen3-VL-2B-Instruct-Heretic": {
      "repo_id": "coder3101/Qwen3-VL-2B-Instruct-heretic"
    },
    "My-Qwen3-8B-Finetune": {
      "repo_id": "myusername/my-qwen3-8b-finetune",
      "model_class": "Qwen3"
    }
  }
}
```

Models are automatically downloaded from HuggingFace on first use and stored in `ComfyUI/models/LLM/`.

## Model Storage

Downloaded models are stored under `ComfyUI/models/LLM/`.

## Bypass Mode

Both nodes include a `bypass` toggle. When enabled:
- **QwenVL**: The `text` input is passed directly to the output without model inference
- **Qwen**: The `prompt` input is passed directly to the output without model inference

This is useful for workflow debugging or when you want to conditionally skip expensive model calls.

Commit message:

docs: Add performance and attention mode details to README and a detailed performance optimization session summary to context.

README.md, after:

# ComfyUI Qwen VL Nodes

This repository provides ComfyUI nodes that wrap the latest vision-language and language-only checkpoints from the Qwen family. Both **Qwen3 VL** and **Qwen2.5 VL** models are supported for multimodal reasoning, alongside text-only Qwen2.5/Qwen3 models for prompt generation.

## What's New

- **Custom Model Support**: Load any Qwen2.5/Qwen3 compatible model from HuggingFace via `custom_models.json`
- **Multi-Image Input**: QwenVL node now supports up to 4 image inputs for multi-image reasoning
- **Bypass Mode**: Skip model inference and pass text directly through for workflow debugging
- **Increased Token Limit**: Max tokens increased to 8000 for longer outputs
- **System Prompt**: QwenVL node now exposes system prompt for custom instructions
- Added support for the Qwen3 VL family (`Qwen3-VL-4B-Thinking`, `Qwen3-VL-8B-Thinking`, etc.)
- Retained compatibility with existing Qwen2.5 VL models
- Text-only workflows support both Qwen2.5 and Qwen3 instruct checkpoints

## Performance & Attention Modes

**Attention Mode Options:** `auto`, `sdpa`, `flash_attention_2`, `eager`

| Mode | Recommendation |
|------|----------------|
| `sdpa` | **Recommended** - Best compatibility and performance on most GPUs |
| `flash_attention_2` | Fastest on SM 80-90 GPUs (RTX 30/40 series). Requires `pip install flash-attn` |
| `eager` | Fallback for compatibility issues |
| `auto` | Defaults to SDPA |

**Quantization Notes:**
- Non-quantized with SDPA: ~17 tokens/sec on RTX 5090
- 4-bit quantization: May be slower on newer GPUs (Blackwell) due to kernel compatibility

## Sample Workflows

- Multimodal workflow example: [`workflow/Qwen2VL.json`](workflow/Qwen2VL.json)
- Text generation workflow example: [`workflow/qwen25.json`](workflow/qwen25.json)

![Qwen VL workflow](workflow/comfy_workflow.png)
![Qwen text workflow](workflow/comfy_workflow2.png)

## Installation

You can install through ComfyUI Manager (search for `Qwen-VL wrapper for ComfyUI`) or manually:

1. Clone the repository:

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/alexcong/ComfyUI_QwenVL.git
   ```

2. Change into the project directory:

   ```bash
   cd ComfyUI_QwenVL
   ```

3. Install dependencies (ensure you are inside your ComfyUI virtual environment if you use one):

   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

## Supported Nodes

### QwenVL Node (Vision-Language)

Multimodal generation with Qwen3 VL and Qwen2.5 VL checkpoints.

**Inputs:**
- `system` – System prompt for model instructions (default: "You are a helpful assistant.")
- `text` – User prompt/question
- `image1`, `image2`, `image3`, `image4` – Up to 4 optional image inputs (processed in order)
- `video_path` – Optional video input
- `model` – Select from built-in or custom models
- `quantization` – none/4-bit/8-bit for memory optimization
- `keep_model_loaded` – Cache model between runs
- `bypass` – Pass text directly to output without inference
- `temperature` – Sampling temperature (0-1)
- `max_new_tokens` – Maximum output tokens (up to 8000)
- `seed` – Manual seed for reproducibility (-1 for random)

### Qwen Node (Text-Only)

Text-only generation backed by Qwen2.5/Qwen3 instruct models.

**Inputs:**
- `system` – System prompt
- `prompt` – User prompt
- `model` – Select from built-in or custom models
- `quantization` – none/4-bit/8-bit
- `keep_model_loaded` – Cache model between runs
- `bypass` – Pass prompt directly to output without inference
- `temperature`, `max_new_tokens`, `seed` – Generation parameters

## Custom Models

You can add any Qwen2.5 or Qwen3 compatible model from HuggingFace by editing the `custom_models.json` file in this directory.

### Adding Custom Models

Edit `custom_models.json` with the following structure:

```json
{
  "hf_models": {
    "My-Custom-Model-Name": {
      "repo_id": "username/model-repo-name",
      "model_class": "Qwen3",
      "default": false,
      "quantized": false,
      "vram_requirement": {
        "4bit": 4,
        "8bit": 6,
        "full": 12
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Field Descriptions

| Field | Required | Description |
|-------|----------|-------------|
| `repo_id` | **Yes** | HuggingFace repository ID (e.g., `"coder3101/Qwen3-VL-2B-Instruct-heretic"`) |
| `model_class` | No | Force model architecture: `"Qwen3"` or `"Qwen2.5"`. Auto-detected from name if omitted. |
| `default` | No | Reserved for future use |
| `quantized` | No | Informational: whether the model is pre-quantized |
| `vram_requirement` | No | Informational: estimated VRAM usage in GB for each quantization level |

### Model Type Detection

- **VL (Vision-Language) models**: Names containing `-VL-` are added to the QwenVL node dropdown
- **Text-only models**: All other models are added to the Qwen node dropdown
- **Model class**: Auto-detected from name (`Qwen3` if name contains "Qwen3", otherwise `Qwen2.5`)

### Example: Adding a Fine-tuned Model

```json
{
  "hf_models": {
    "Qwen3-VL-2B-Instruct-Heretic": {
      "repo_id": "coder3101/Qwen3-VL-2B-Instruct-heretic"
    },
    "My-Qwen3-8B-Finetune": {
      "repo_id": "myusername/my-qwen3-8b-finetune",
      "model_class": "Qwen3"
    }
  }
}
```

Models are automatically downloaded from HuggingFace on first use and stored in `ComfyUI/models/LLM/`.

## Model Storage

Downloaded models are stored under `ComfyUI/models/LLM/`.

## Bypass Mode

Both nodes include a `bypass` toggle. When enabled:
- **QwenVL**: The `text` input is passed directly to the output without model inference
- **Qwen**: The `prompt` input is passed directly to the output without model inference

This is useful for workflow debugging or when you want to conditionally skip expensive model calls.
